Release Date: January 4, 2010  [eBook #30855]

Language: English


﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman, by H. G.
(Herbert George) Wells


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at gutenberg.org





Title: The Wife of Sir Isaac Harman


Author: H. G. (Herbert George) Wells



Release Date: January 4, 2010  [eBook #30855]

Language: English


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WIFE OF SIR ISAAC HARMAN***


E-text prepared by Juliet Sutherland, Graeme Mackreth, and the Project
Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE WIFE OF SIR ISAAC HARMAN

by

H. G. WELLS







New York
The Macmillan Company
1914

All rights reserved

Copyright, 1914,
By H. G. Wells.

Set up and electrotyped. Published September, 1914.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER                                                 PAGE

   I. INTRODUCES LADY HARMAN                                1

  II. THE PERSONALITY OF SIR ISAAC                         30

 III. LADY HARMAN AT HOME                                  51

  IV. THE BEGINNINGS OF LADY HARMAN                        83

   V. THE WORLD ACCORDING TO SIR ISAAC                     98

  VI. THE ADVENTUROUS AFTERNOON                           143

 VII. LADY HARMAN LEARNS ABOUT HERSELF                    198

VIII. SIR ISAAC AS PETRUCHIO                              231

  IX. MR. BRUMLEY IS TROUBLED BY DIFFICULT IDEAS          287

   X. LADY HARMAN COMES OUT                               343

  XI. THE LAST CRISIS                                     427

 XII. LOVE AND A SERIOUS LADY                             496




THE WIFE OF SIR ISAAC HARMAN




CHAPTER THE FIRST

INTRODUCES LADY HARMAN


§1

The motor-car entered a little white gate, came to a porch under a thick
wig of jasmine, and stopped. The chauffeur indicated by a movement of
the head that this at last was it. A tall young woman with a big soft
mouth, great masses of blue-black hair on either side of a broad, low
forehead, and eyes of so dark a brown you might have thought them black,
drooped forward and surveyed the house with a mixture of keen
appreciation and that gentle apprehension which is the shadow of desire
in unassuming natures....

The little house with the white-framed windows looked at her with a
sleepy wakefulness from under its blinds, and made no sign. Beyond the
corner was a glimpse of lawn, a rank of delphiniums, and the sound of a
wheel-barrow.

"Clarence!" the lady called again.

Clarence, with an air of exceeding his duties, decided to hear,
descended slowly, and came to the door.

"Very likely--if you were to look for a bell, Clarence...."

Clarence regarded the porch with a hostile air, made no secret that he
thought it a fool of a porch, seemed on the point of disobedience, and
submitted. His gestures suggested a belief that he would next be asked
to boil eggs or do the boots. He found a bell and rang it with the
needless violence of a man who has no special knowledge of ringing
bells. How was _he_ to know? he was a chauffeur. The bell did not so
much ring as explode and swamp the place. Sounds of ringing came from
all the windows, and even out of the chimneys. It seemed as if once set
ringing that bell would never cease....

Clarence went to the bonnet of his machine, and presented his stooping
back in a defensive manner against anyone who might come out. He wasn't
a footman, anyhow. He'd rung that bell all right, and now he must see to
his engine.

"He's rung so _loud!_" said the lady weakly--apparently to God.

The door behind the neat white pillars opened, and a little red-nosed
woman, in a cap she had evidently put on without a proper glass,
appeared. She surveyed the car and its occupant with disfavour over her
also very oblique spectacles.

The lady waved a pink paper to her, a house-agent's order to view. "Is
this Black Strands?" she shouted.

The little woman advanced slowly with her eyes fixed malevolently on the
pink paper. She seemed to be stalking it.

"This is Black Strands?" repeated the tall lady. "I should be so sorry
if I disturbed you--if it isn't; ringing the bell like that--and all.
You can't think----"

"This is Black _Strand_," said the little old woman with a note of deep
reproach, and suddenly ceased to look over her glasses and looked
through them. She looked no kindlier through them, and her eye seemed
much larger. She was now regarding the lady in the car, though with a
sustained alertness towards the pink paper. "I suppose," she said,
"you've come to see over the place?"

"If it doesn't disturb anyone; if it is quite convenient----"

"Mr. Brumley is _hout_," said the little old woman. "And if you got an
order to view, you got an order to view."

"If you think I might."

The lady stood up in the car, a tall and graceful figure of doubt and
desire and glossy black fur. "I'm sure it looks a very charming house."

"It's _clean_," said the little old woman, "from top to toe. Look as you
may."

"I'm sure it is," said the tall lady, and put aside her great fur coat
from her lithe, slender, red-clad body. (She was permitted by a sudden
civility of Clarence's to descend.) "Why! the windows," she said,
pausing on the step, "are like crystal."

"These very 'ands," said the little old woman, and glanced up at the
windows the lady had praised. The little old woman's initial sternness
wrinkled and softened as the skin of a windfall does after a day or so
upon the ground. She half turned in the doorway and made a sudden
vergerlike gesture. "We enter," she said, "by the 'all.... Them's Mr.
Brumley's 'ats and sticks. Every 'at or cap 'as a stick, and every stick
'as a 'at _or_ cap, and on the 'all table is the gloves corresponding.
On the right is the door leading to the kitching, on the left is the
large droring-room which Mr. Brumley 'as took as 'is study." Her voice
fell to lowlier things. "The other door beyond is a small lavatory
'aving a basing for washing 'ands."

"It's a perfectly delightful hall," said the lady. "So low and
wide-looking. And everything so bright--and lovely. Those long, Italian
pictures! And how charming that broad outlook upon the garden beyond!"

"You'll think it charminger when you see the garding," said the little
old woman. "It was Mrs. Brumley's especial delight. Much of it--with 'er
own 'ands."

"We now enter the droring-room," she proceeded, and flinging open the
door to the right was received with an indistinct cry suggestive of the
words, "Oh, _damn_ it!" The stout medium-sized gentleman in an artistic
green-grey Norfolk suit, from whom the cry proceeded, was kneeling on
the floor close to the wide-open window, and he was engaged in lacing up
a boot. He had a round, ruddy, rather handsome, amiable face with a sort
of bang of brown hair coming over one temple, and a large silk bow under
his chin and a little towards one ear, such as artists and artistic men
of letters affect. His profile was regular and fine, his eyes
expressive, his mouth, a very passable mouth. His features expressed at
first only the naïve horror of a shy man unveiled.

Intelligent appreciation supervened.

There was a crowded moment of rapid mutual inspection. The lady's
attitude was that of the enthusiastic house-explorer arrested in full
flight, falling swiftly towards apology and retreat. (It was a
frightfully attractive room, too, full of the brightest colour, and with
a big white cast of a statue--a Venus!--in the window.) She backed over
the threshold again.

"I thought you was out by that window, sir," said the little old woman
intimately, and was nearly shutting the door between them and all the
beginnings of this story.

But the voice of the gentleman arrested and wedged open the closing
door.

"I----Are you looking at the house?" he said. "I say! Just a moment,
Mrs. Rabbit."

He came down the length of the room with a slight flicking noise due to
the scandalized excitement of his abandoned laces. The lady was reminded
of her not so very distant schooldays, when it would have been
considered a suitable answer to such a question as his to reply, "No, I
am walking down Piccadilly on my hands." But instead she waved that pink
paper again. "The agents," she said. "Recommended--specially. So sorry
if I intrude. I ought, I know, to have written first; but I came on an
impulse."

By this time the gentleman in the artistic tie, who had also the
artistic eye for such matters, had discovered that the lady was young,
delightfully slender, either pretty or beautiful, he could scarcely tell
which, and very, very well dressed. "I am glad," he said, with
remarkable decision, "that I was not out. _I_ will show you the house."

"'Ow _can_ you, sir?" intervened the little old woman.

"Oh! show a house! Why not?"

"The kitchings--you don't understand the range, sir--it's beyond you.
And upstairs. You can't show a lady upstairs."

The gentleman reflected upon these difficulties.

"Well, I'm going to show her all I can show her anyhow. And after that,
Mrs. Rabbit, you shall come in. You needn't wait."

"I'm thinking," said Mrs. Rabbit, folding stiff little arms and
regarding him sternly. "You won't be much good after tea, you know, if
you don't get your afternoon's exercise."

"Rendez-vous in the kitchen, Mrs. Rabbit," said Mr. Brumley, firmly, and
Mrs. Rabbit after a moment of mute struggle disappeared discontentedly.

"I do not want to be the least bit a bother," said the lady. "I'm
intruding, I know, without the least bit of notice. I _do_ hope I'm not
disturbing you----" she seemed to make an effort to stop at that, and
failed and added--"the least bit. Do please tell me if I am."

"Not at all," said Mr. Brumley. "I hate my afternoon's walk as a
prisoner hates the treadmill."

"She's such a nice old creature."

"She's been a mother--and several aunts--to us ever since my wife die