Author: Herbert George Wells
Title: The Future in America
       A Search After Realities


﻿The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Future in America, by Herbert George Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Future in America
       A Search After Realities

Author: Herbert George Wells

Release Date: February 2, 2018 [EBook #56484]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE FUTURE IN AMERICA ***




Produced by ellinora, Graeme Mackreth and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)







[Illustration: FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK]




  THE
  FUTURE IN AMERICA

  A SEARCH AFTER REALITIES

  BY
  H.G. WELLS

  AUTHOR OF
  "ANTICIPATIONS" "THE WAR OF THE WORLDS"
  "THIRTY STRANGE STORIES" ETC.

  ILLUSTRATED

  [Illustration]

  HARPER & BROTHERS PUBLISHERS
  NEW YORK AND LONDON
  1906




  Copyright, 1906, by Harper & Brothers.

  _All rights reserved._

  Published November, 1906.




CONTENTS


  CHAP.                                                       PAGE

     I. The Prophetic Habit of Mind                              1

    II. Material Progress                                       21

   III. New York                                                35

    IV. Growth Invincible                                       49

     V. The Economic Process                                    68

    VI. Some Aspects of American Wealth                         88

   VII. Certain Workers                                        104

  VIII. Corruption                                             116

    IX. The Immigrant                                          133

     X. State-Blindness                                        152

    XI. Two Studies in Disappointment                          167

   XII. The Tragedy of Color                                   185

  XIII. The Mind of a Modern State                             203

   XIV. Culture                                                223

    XV. At Washington                                          236

        The Envoy                                              254




ILLUSTRATIONS


  FIFTH AVENUE, NEW YORK                                 _Frontispiece_

  ENTRANCE TO BROOKLYN BRIDGE                            _Facing p._ 38

  STATE STREET, CHICAGO                                     "        62

  WESTERN FARMERS STILL OWN THEIR FARMS                     "        82

  PLUMP AND PRETTY PUPILS OF EXTRAVAGANCE                   "        90

  NEW YORK'S CROWDED, LITTERED EAST SIDE                    "       106

  BREAKER BOYS AT A PENNSYLVANIA COLLIERY                   "       112

  INTERIOR OF A NEW YORK OFFICE BUILDING                    "       124

  WHERE IMMIGRANT CHILDREN ARE AMERICANIZED                 "       148

  HARVARD HALL AND THE JOHNSON GATE, CAMBRIDGE              "       214

  A BIT OF PRINCETON UNIVERSITY                             "       216

  IN THE CONGRESSIONAL LIBRARY                              "       238




THE FUTURE IN AMERICA




THE FUTURE IN AMERICA




CHAPTER I

THE PROPHETIC HABIT OF MIND

(_At a writing-desk in Sandgate_)


I

The Question

"Are you a Polygamist?"

"Are you an Anarchist?"

The questions seem impertinent. They are part of a long paper of
interrogations I must answer satisfactorily if I am to be regarded as
a desirable alien to enter the United States of America. I want very
much to pass that great statue of Liberty illuminating the World (from
a central position in New York Harbor), in order to see things in its
light, to talk to certain people, to appreciate certain atmospheres,
and so I resist the provocation to answer impertinently. I do not
even volunteer that I do not smoke and am a total abstainer; on which
points it would seem the States as a whole still keep an open mind.
I am full of curiosity about America, I am possessed by a problem I
feel I cannot adequately discuss even with myself except over there,
and I must go even at the price of coming to a decision upon the
theoretically open questions these two inquiries raise.

My problem I know will seem ridiculous and monstrous when I give it in
all its stark disproportions--attacked by me with my equipment it will
call up an image of an elephant assailed by an ant who has not even
mastered Jiu-jitsu--but at any rate I've come to it in a natural sort
of way and it is one I must, for my own peace of mind, make some kind
of attempt upon, even if at last it means no more than the ant crawling
in an exploratory way hither and thither over that vast unconscious
carcass and finally getting down and going away. That may be rather
good for the ant, and the experience may be of interest to other ants,
however infinitesimal from the point of view of the elephant, the final
value of his investigation may be. And this tremendous problem in my
case and now in this--simply; What is going to happen to the United
States of America in the next thirty years or so?

I do not know if the reader has ever happened upon any books or
writings of mine before, but if, what is highly probable, he has not,
he may be curious to know how it is that any human being should be
running about in so colossally an interrogative state of mind. (For
even the present inquiry is by no means my maximum limit). And the
explanation is to be found a little in a mental idiosyncrasy perhaps,
but much more in the development of a special way of thinking, of a
habit of mind.

That habit of mind may be indicated by a proposition that, with a fine
air of discovery, I threw out some years ago, in a happy ignorance that
I had been anticipated by no less a person than Heraclitus. "There is
no Being but Becoming," that was what appeared to my unscholarly mind
to be almost triumphantly new. I have since then informed myself more
fully about Heraclitus, there are moments now when I more than half
suspect that all the thinking I shall ever do will simply serve to
illuminate my understanding of him, but at any rate that apothegm of
his does exactly convey the intellectual attitude into which I fall. I
am curiously not interested in things, and curiously interested in the
consequences of things. I wouldn't for the world go to see the United
States for what they are--if I had sound reason for supposing that the
entire western hemisphere was to be destroyed next Christmas, I should
not, I think, be among the multitude that would rush for one last look
at that great spectacle,--from which it follows naturally that I don't
propose to see Niagara. I should much more probably turn an inquiring
visage eastward, with the west so certainly provided for. I have come
to be, I am afraid, even a little insensitive to fine immediate things
through this anticipatory habit.

This habit of mind confronts and perplexes my sense of things that
simply _are_, with my brooding preoccupation with how they will
shape presently, what they will lead to, what seed they will sow
and how they will wear. At times, I can assure the reader, this
quality approaches otherworldliness, in its constant reference to an
all-important here-after. There are times indeed when it makes life
seem so transparent and flimsy, seem so dissolving, so passing on
to an equally transitory series of consequences, that the enhanced
sense of instability becomes restlessness and distress; but on the
other hand nothing that exists, nothing whatever, remains altogether
vulgar or dull and dead or hopeless in its light. But the interest
is shifted. The pomp and splendor of established order, the braying
triumphs, ceremonies, consummations, one sees these glittering shows
for what they are--through their threadbare grandeur shine the little
significant things that will make the future....

And now that I am associating myself with great names, let me discover
that I find this characteristic turn of mind of mine, not only in
Heraclitus, the most fragmentary of philosophers, but for one fine
passage at any rate, in Mr. Henry James, the least fragmentary
of novelists. In his recent impressions of America I find him
apostrophizing the great mansions of Fifth Avenue, in words quite after
my heart;--

"It's all very well," he writes, "for you to look as if, since you've
had no past, you're going in, as the next best thing, for a magnificent
compensatory future. What are you going to make your future _of_, for
all your airs, we want to know? What elements of a future, as futures
have gone in the great world, are at all assured to you?"

I had already when I read that, figured myself as addressing if not
these particular last triumphs of the fine Transatlantic art of
architecture, then at least America in general in some such words. It
is not unpleasant to be anticipated by the chief Master of one's craft,
it is indeed, when one reflects upon his peculiar intimacy with this
problem, enormously reassuring, and so I have very gladly annexed his
phrasing and put it here to honor and adorn and in a manner to explain
my own enterprise. I have already studied some of these fine buildings
through the mediation of an illustrated magazine--they appear solid,
they appear wonderful and well done to the highest pitch--and before
many days now I shall, I hope, reconstruct that particular moment,
stand--the latest admirer from England--regarding these portentous
magnificences, from the same sidewalk--will they call it?--as my
illustrious predecessor, and with his question ringing in my mind
all the louder for their proximity, and the univer