Character set encoding: UTF-8

The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Room, by H. G. Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at gutenberg.org


Title: The Red Room

Author: H. G. Wells

Release Date: October 27, 2007 [EBook #23218]
Last Updated: September 17, 2016


Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED ROOM ***




Produced by David Widger






THE RED ROOM

By H. G. Wells




“I can assure you,” said I, “that it will take a very tangible ghost to
frighten me.” And I stood up before the fire with my glass in my hand.

“It is your own choosing,” said the man with the withered arm, and glanced
at me askance.

“Eight-and-twenty years,” said I, “I have lived, and never a ghost have I
seen as yet.”

The old woman sat staring hard into the fire, her pale eyes wide open.
“Ay,” she broke in; “and eight-and-twenty years you have lived and never
seen the likes of this house, I reckon. There’s a many things to see, when
one’s still but eight-and-twenty.” She swayed her head slowly from side to
side. “A many things to see and sorrow for.”

I half suspected the old people were trying to enhance the spiritual
terrors of their house by their droning insistence. I put down my empty
glass on the table and looked about the room, and caught a glimpse of
myself, abbreviated and broadened to an impossible sturdiness, in the
queer old mirror at the end of the room. “Well,” I said, “if I see
anything to-night, I shall be so much the wiser. For I come to the
business with an open mind.”

“It’s your own choosing,” said the man with the withered arm once more.

I heard the faint sound of a stick and a shambling step on the flags in
the passage outside. The door creaked on its hinges as a second old man
entered, more bent, more wrinkled, more aged even than the first. He
supported himself by the help of a crutch, his eyes were covered by
a shade, and his lower lip, half averted, hung pale and pink from his
decaying yellow teeth. He made straight for an armchair on the opposite
side of the table, sat down clumsily, and began to cough. The man with
the withered hand gave the newcomer a short glance of positive dislike;
the old woman took no notice of his arrival, but remained with her eyes
fixed steadily on the fire.

“I said--it’s your own choosing,” said the man with the withered hand,
when the coughing had ceased for a while.

“It’s my own choosing,” I answered.

The man with the shade became aware of my presence for the first time,
and threw his head back for a moment, and sidewise, to see me. I caught
a momentary glimpse of his eyes, small and bright and inflamed. Then he
began to cough and splutter again.

“Why don’t you drink?” said the man with the withered arm, pushing the
beer toward him. The man with the shade poured out a glassful with a
shaking hand, that splashed half as much again on the deal table. A
monstrous shadow of him crouched upon the wall, and mocked his action
as he poured and drank. I must confess I had scarcely expected these
grotesque custodians. There is, to my mind, something inhuman in
senility, something crouching and atavistic; the human qualities seem
to drop from old people insensibly day by day. The three of them made me
feel uncomfortable with their gaunt silences, their bent carriage,
their evident unfriendliness to me and to one another. And that night,
perhaps, I was in the mood for uncomfortable impressions. I resolved to
get away from their vague fore-shadowings of the evil things upstairs.

“If,” said I, “you will show me to this haunted room of yours, I will
make myself comfortable there.”

The old man with the cough jerked his head back so suddenly that it
startled me, and shot another glance of his red eyes at me from out of
the darkness under the shade, but no one answered me. I waited a minute,
glancing from one to the other. The old woman stared like a dead body,
glaring into the fire with lack-lustre eyes.

“If,” I said, a little louder, “if you will show me to this haunted room
of yours, I will relieve you from the task of entertaining me.”

“There’s a candle on the slab outside the door,” said the man with the
withered hand, looking at my feet as he addressed me. “But if you go to
the Red Room to-night--”

“This night of all nights!” said the old woman, softly.

“--You go alone.”

“Very well,” I answered, shortly, “and which way do I go?”

“You go along the passage for a bit,” said he, nodding his head on his
shoulder at the door, “until you come to a spiral staircase; and on the
second landing is a door covered with green baize. Go through that, and
down the long corridor to the end, and the Red Room is on your left up
the steps.”

“Have I got that right?” I said, and repeated his directions.

He corrected me in one particular.

“And you are really going?” said the man with the shade, looking at me
again for the third time with that queer, unnatural tilting of the face.

“This night of all nights!” whispered the old woman.

“It is what I came for,” I said, and moved toward the door. As I did so,
the old man with the shade rose and staggered round the table, so as to
be closer to the others and to the fire. At the door I turned and
looked at them, and saw they were all close together, dark against the
firelight, staring at me over their shoulders, with an intent expression
on their ancient faces.

“Good-night,” I said, setting the door open. “It’s your own choosing,”
 said the man with the withered arm.

I left the door wide open until the candle was well alight, and then I
shut them in, and walked down the chilly, echoing passage.

I must confess that the oddness of these three old pensioners in
whose charge her ladyship had left the castle, and the deep-toned,
old-fashioned furniture of the housekeeper’s room, in which they
foregathered, had affected me curiously in spite of my effort to keep
myself at a matter-of-fact phase. They seemed to belong to another age,
an older age, an age when things spiritual were indeed to be feared,
when common sense was uncommon, an age when omens and witches were
credible, and ghosts beyond denying. Their very existence, thought I, is
spectral; the cut of their clothing, fashions born in dead brains; the
ornaments and conveniences in the room about them even are ghostly--the
thoughts of vanished men, which still haunt rather than participate in
the world of to-day. And the passage I was in, long and shadowy, with
a film of moisture glistening on the wall, was as gaunt and cold as a
thing that is dead and rigid. But with an effort I sent such thoughts
to the right-about. The long, drafty subterranean passage was chilly and
dusty, and my candle flared and made the shadows cower and quiver. The
echoes rang up and down the spiral staircase, and a shadow came sweeping
up after me, and another fled before me into the darkness overhead. I
came to the wide landing and stopped there for a moment listening to a
rustling that I fancied I heard creeping behind me, and then, satisfied
of the absolute silence, pushed open the unwilling baize-covered door
and stood in the silent corridor.

The effect was scarcely what I expected, for the moonlight, coming in by
the great window on the grand staircase, picked out everything in vivid
black shadow or reticulated silvery illumination. Everything seemed in
its proper position; the house might have been deserted on the yesterday
instead of twelve months ago. There were candles in the sockets of
the sconces, and whatever dust had gathered on the carpets or upon the
polished flooring was distributed so evenly as to be invisible in my
candlelight. A waiting stillness was over everything. I was about to
advance, and stopped abruptly. A bronze group stood upon the landing
hidden from me by a corner of the wall; but its shadow fell with
marvelous distinctness upon the white paneling, and gave me the
impression of some one crouching to waylay me. The thing jumped upon
my attention suddenly. I stood rigid for half a moment, perhaps. Then,
with my hand in the pocket that held the revolver, I advanced, only
to discover a Ganymede and Eagle, glistening in the moonlight. That
incident for a time restored my nerve, and a dim porcelain Chinaman on a
buhl table, whose head rocked as I passed, scarcely startled me.

The door of the Red Room and the steps up to it were in a shadowy
corner. I moved my candle from side to side in order to see clearly the
nature of the recess in which I stood, before opening the door. Here it
was, thought I, that my predecessor was found, and the memory of
that story gave me a sudden twinge of apprehension. I glanced over my
shoulder at the black Ganymede in the moonlight, and opened the door
of the Red Room rather hastily, with my face half turned to the pallid
silence of the corridor.

I entered, closed the door behind me at once, turned the key I found
in the lock within, and stood with the candle held aloft surveying the
scene of my vigil, the great Red Room of Lorraine Castle, in which the
young Duke had died; or rather in which he had begun his dying, for
he had opened the door and fallen headlong down the steps I had just
ascended. That had been the end of his vigil, of his gallant attempt to
conquer the ghostly tradition of the place, and never, I thought, had
apoplexy better served the ends of superstition. There were other
and older stories that clung to the room, back to the half-incredible
beginning of it all, the tale of a timid wife and the tragic end that
came to her husband’s jest of frightening her. And looking round that
huge shadowy room with its black window bays, its recesses and alcoves,
its dusty brown-red hangings and dark gigantic furniture, one could
well understand the legends that had sprouted in its black corners, its
germin