

﻿Project Gutenberg’s When the Sleeper Wakes, by Herbert George Wells

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at gutenberg.org


Title: When the Sleeper Wakes

Author: Herbert George Wells

Posting Date: August 10, 2008 [EBook #775]
Release Date: January, 1997
Last Updated: September 17, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES ***




Produced by John Bean





WHEN THE SLEEPER WAKES

By Herbert George Wells




CHAPTER I. INSOMNIA

One afternoon, at low water, Mr. Isbister, a young artist lodging at
Boscastle, walked from that place to the picturesque cove of Pentargen,
desiring to examine the caves there. Halfway down the precipitous
path to the Pentargen beach he came suddenly upon a man sitting in an
attitude of profound distress beneath a projecting mass of rock. The
hands of this man hung limply over his knees, his eyes were red and
staring before him, and his face was wet with tears.

He glanced round at Isbister’s footfall. Both men were disconcerted,
Isbister the more so, and, to override the awkwardness of his
involuntary pause, he remarked, with an air of mature conviction, that
the weather was hot for the time of year.

“Very,” answered the stranger shortly, hesitated a second, and added in
a colourless tone, “I can’t sleep.”

Isbister stopped abruptly. “No?” was all he said, but his bearing
conveyed his helpful impulse.

“It may sound incredible,” said the stranger, turning weary eyes to
Isbister’s face and emphasizing his words with a languid hand, “but I
have had no sleep--no sleep at all for six nights.”

“Had advice?”

“Yes. Bad advice for the most part. Drugs. My nervous system.... They
are all very well for the run of people. It’s hard to explain. I dare
not take... sufficiently powerful drugs.”

“That makes it difficult,” said Isbister.

He stood helplessly in the narrow path, perplexed what to do. Clearly
the man wanted to talk. An idea natural enough under the circumstances,
prompted him to keep the conversation going. “I’ve never suffered from
sleeplessness myself,” he said in a tone of commonplace gossip, “but in
those cases I have known, people have usually found something--”

“I dare make no experiments.”

He spoke wearily. He gave a gesture of rejection, and for a space both
men were silent.

“Exercise?” suggested Isbister diffidently, with a glance from his
interlocutor’s face of wretchedness to the touring costume he wore.

“That is what I have tried. Unwisely perhaps. I have followed the coast,
day after day--from New Quay. It has only added muscular fatigue to
the mental. The cause of this unrest was overwork--trouble. There was
something--”

He stopped as if from sheer fatigue. He rubbed his forehead with a lean
hand. He resumed speech like one who talks to himself.

“I am a lone wolf, a solitary man, wandering through a world in which
I have no part. I am wifeless--childless--who is it speaks of the
childless as the dead twigs on the tree of life? I am wifeless, I
childless--I could find no duty to do. No desire even in my heart. One
thing at last I set myself to do.

“I said, I will do this, and to do it, to overcome the inertia of this
dull body, I resorted to drugs. Great God, I’ve had enough of drugs!
I don’t know if _you_ feel the heavy inconvenience of the body, its
exasperating demand of time from the mind--time--life! Live! We only
live in patches. We have to eat, and then comes the dull digestive
complacencies--or irritations. We have to take the air or else our
thoughts grow sluggish, stupid, run into gulfs and blind alleys. A
thousand distractions arise from within and without, and then comes
drowsiness and sleep. Men seem to live for sleep. How little of a man’s
day is his own--even at the best! And then come those false friends,
those Thug helpers, the alkaloids that stifle natural fatigue and kill
rest--black coffee, cocaine--”

“I see,” said Isbister.

“I did my work,” said the sleepless man with a querulous intonation.

“And this is the price?”

“Yes.”

For a little while the two remained without speaking.

“You cannot imagine the craving for rest that I feel--a hunger and
thirst. For six long days, since my work was done, my mind has been a
whirlpool, swift, unprogressive and incessant, a torrent of thoughts
leading nowhere, spinning round swift and steady--”

He paused. “Towards the gulf.”

“You must sleep,” said Isbister decisively, and with an air of a remedy
discovered. “Certainly you must sleep.”

“My mind is perfectly lucid. It was never clearer. But I know I am
drawing towards the vortex. Presently--”

“Yes?”

“You have seen things go down an eddy? Out of the light of the day, out
of this sweet world of sanity--down--”

“But,” expostulated Isbister.

The man threw out a hand towards him, and his eyes were wild, and his
voice suddenly high. “I shall kill myself. If in no other way--at the
foot of yonder dark precipice there, where the waves are green, and the
white surge lifts and falls, and that little thread of water trembles
down. There at any rate is ... sleep.”

“That’s unreasonable,” said Isbister, startled at the man’s hysterical
gust of emotion. “Drugs are better than that.”

“There at any rate is sleep,” repeated the stranger, not heeding him.

Isbister looked at him and wondered transitorily if some complex
Providence had indeed brought them together that afternoon. “It’s not
a cert, you know,” he remarked. “There’s a cliff like that at Lulworth
Cove--as high, anyhow--and a little girl fell from top to bottom. And
lives to-day--sound and well.”

“But those rocks there?”

“One might lie on them rather dismally through a cold night, broken
bones grating as one shivered, chill water splashing over you. Eh?”

Their eyes met. “Sorry to upset your ideals,” said Isbister with a sense
of devil-may-careish brilliance.

“But a suicide over that cliff (or any cliff for the matter of that),
really, as an artist--” He laughed. “It’s so damned amateurish.”

“But the other thing,” said the sleepless man irritably, “the other
thing. No man can keep sane if night after night--”

“Have you been walking along this coast alone?”

“Yes.”

“Silly sort of thing to do. If you’ll excuse my saying so. Alone! As
you say; body fag is no cure for brain fag. Who told you to? No wonder;
walking! And the sun on your head, heat, fag, solitude, all the day
long, and then, I suppose, you go to bed and try very hard--eh?”

Isbister stopped short and looked at the sufferer doubtfully.

“Look at these rocks!” cried the seated man with a sudden force of
gesture. “Look at that sea that has shone and quivered there for ever!
See the white spume rush into darkness under that great cliff. And this
blue vault, with the blinding sun pouring from the dome of it. It is
your world. You accept it, you rejoice in it. It warms and supports and
delights you. And for me--”

He turned his head and showed a ghastly face, bloodshot pallid eyes and
bloodless lips. He spoke almost in a whisper. “It is the garment of my
misery. The whole world... is the garment of my misery.”

Isbister looked at all the wild beauty of the sunlit cliffs about them
and back to that face of despair. For a moment he was silent.

He started, and made a gesture of impatient rejection. “You get a
night’s sleep,” he said, “and you won’t see much misery out here. Take
my word for it.”

He was quite sure now that this was a providential encounter. Only half
an hour ago he had been feeling horribly bored. Here was employment the
bare thought of which was righteous self-applause. He took possession
forthwith. It seemed to him that the first need of this exhausted being
was companionship He flung himself down on the steeply sloping turf
beside the motionless seated figure, and deployed forthwith into a
skirmishing line of gossip.

His hearer seemed to have lapsed into apathy; he stared dismally
seaward, and spoke only in answer to Isbister’s direct questions--and
not to all of those. But he made no sign of objection to this benevolent
intrusion upon his despair.

In a helpless way he seemed even grateful, and when presently Isbister,
feeling that his unsupported talk was losing vigour, suggested that they
should reascend the steep and return towards Boscastle, alleging the
view into Blackapit, he submitted quietly. Halfway up he began talking
to himself, and abruptly turned a ghastly face on his helper. “What can
be happening?” he asked with a gaunt illustrative hand. “What can be
happening? Spin, spin, spin, spin. It goes round and round, round and
round for evermore.”

He stood with his hand circling

“It’s all right, old chap,” said Isbister with the air of an old friend.
“Don’t worry yourself. Trust to me.”

The man dropped his hand and turned again. They went over the brow in
single file and to the headland beyond Penally, with the sleepless man
gesticulating ever and again, and speaking fragmentary things concerning
his whirling brain. At the headland they stood for a space by the seat
that looks into the dark mysteries of Blackapit, and then he sat down.
Isbister had resumed his talk whenever the path had widened sufficiently
for them to walk abreast. He was enlarging upon the complex difficulty
of making Boscastle Harbour in bad weather, when suddenly and quite
irrelevantly his companion interrupted him again.

“My head is not like what it was,” he said, gesticulating for want
of expressive phrases. “It’s not like what it was. There is a sort of
oppression, a weight. No--not drowsiness, would God it were! It is like
a shadow, a deep shadow falling suddenly and swiftly across something
busy. Spin, spin into the darkness. The tumult of thought, the confusion,
the eddy and eddy. I can’t express it. I can hardly keep my mind on
it--steadily enough to tell you.”
